we have a panel here composed of the
creators of inferno
the curator and creative director and
CEO of the Institute of computer sound
and music who supported and developed
the hexa dome experience an artist who
developed a project on the hexa dome and
then Andres who funded help support the
tour and fund the hexa dome I'm going to
let them introduce themselves first so
why don't we do that before I just
rattle off a series of accolades and
I'll let you guys introduce yourselves
first my name is Bill Warren I'm from
Montreal Canada in North America well
with we Philip we have made Inferno
so we were all invited to try it
whenever you can it's running until it
was Sunday as for myself originally I
was a musician and the 80s like music
composer and sunny deter and bit of
everything but mostly sound and music
and I started to work with no making
machines and robots for shows when I met
with Philip early 90s so it's been a
while since now we've been working with
this but Inferno sort of the really the
latest work we've done with some kind of
a new approach well it's a bit
experimental at the same time
and this is something that you know we
really want you to try and you're
welcome also to give us your feedback
what you think about it and how you feel
being controlled by the system I'm Louis
Philippe the mess I'm also originally
from Montreal right now I live in
Australia and Brisbane
just a little bit of background in the
80s I was doing some AI work at
University and I got bored and I went to
art school then doing stage work and
then got bored from stage works and we
say let's start play with robots so this
is when we started to do these kind of
experiments so that's a very fast track
of the last 30 years of nuts and bolts
but the the point of the what links with
the experiential moment is I think it's
it's kind of the zeitgeist of artwork
these days it's all about the experience
and in this space and the environment so
I think the the beauty of these things
that they they speak to your bodies they
speak to your senses and instead of like
driving mainly your conceptual or your
intellectual side so it really
challenges reconnects you to let's say
who we really are in a very basic way so
I think that beyond all these what
apparently it was very high-tech it's
something that is very very close to the
core of your likely's living organism so
it's kind of a you have to experience it
to get an idea of what it is and that's
a beauty of it this is something you
cannot read in a catalogue or somebody
can speak about it you just have to do
it that's the meaning of the word
experience I'm Laura Starkey and I'm
from San Francisco I'm a producer
filmmaker and co-founder of record label
Club hi that is based in Oakland and
it's centers diasporic artists who
[Music]
carve-out sounds and spaces considering
the way we build narratives that we push
towards I guess like for the future
current selves and future selves so good
morning my name is Nick Mian the
chairman and artistic director for the
Institute for sound and music in Berlin
we have the hexa dome here is MX adone
and this will be touring throughout
North America over the next few months
the hexa dome essentially represents the
first step for the is M which is
essentially a campaign with three
exhibitions the first dedicated to
immersive art the second dedicated to
sound and the third dedicated to music
sound in a non musical context and music
in an experience or experience context
and really what this campaign is about
is to create a home for these kinds of
works to be developed in Berlin and
created in Berlin and designed to travel
so really drawing a connection between
the work that's being done by artists
there and internationally to to cities
throughout the world my name is Andres
I'm the director for culture and
communication education in the foreign
ministry so basically we put each and
every year 900 million euros into
education into culture and into
communication abroad and some words of
background I've started my career and
then in the mid 90s in a theater called
baleen Osama that the ancient theatre of
brushed in in Berlin then I stepped over
to the film industry I did for two years
to two and a half years fame financing
in Germany then I contributed to cut off
what was called in the beginning of the
2000s the silly German money so the film
funds was working in the in the energy
industry and then was called in by by
guy called coach Dan Meyer who's
actually president of of the Federal
Republic to do culture and communication
in the foreign ministry and we try to
things for
to support financially and politically
open spaces and secondly to open those
in spaces to new kinds of narratives so
that's what we are doing but we are part
of the system I love it so I my favorite
artists favorite yeah I so I wanted to I
I was lucky enough to go between the two
experiences and although we booked and
curated the experiences I hadn't
actually experienced them myself and so
it was it was interesting to try to
connect the two through actually seeing
them because we've been describing them
and I think that we'll find over the
next couple days we're all searching for
words to describe what were what we're
doing and what we're feeling what we're
experiencing and my connection for the
experiences last night was seeing people
first at the hexa dome coming in being
very social then immediately as the
contents are just down on the floor just
like in a meditative state looking
around very quiet almost in a Zen zone
come back to here industrial techno
strobe lights but I still got that same
sense of the people the performers the
people that were engaged and in the
machines themselves getting into that
same zone the same meditation zone as
they let go of themselves and started to
just feel and be something else and be
somewhere else I think there's this huge
thing that you you see once you see the
show you see people go into okay I'm
gonna dance and then five minutes later
go into okay I need to let go actually I
need to close my eyes and become the
robot and become the experience and then
that goes into okay I need to get get
the hell out
so I'm just curious if there were any
sort of magic moments that you've seen
or if there was an intention and I think
for both of you guys it what some of the
magic experiences that you've had and
and people talking to you
what people it has a change lives has
you know what what has happened through
this type of experience that you've
created that you didn't expect I think
first of all the when we did this was
very important that the the people will
wear the exoskeletons will be taken from
the audience and they will be untrained
or they didn't know what to expect that
it was important this wouldn't work at
all with let's say we have 24 of those
here but with 24 like let's say trained
dancers they will turn into you like
synchronized swimming really fast so
this is not what we wanted so the beauty
of the experience is like you - it's
totally alien to yourself to start with
and when we you have to imagine when
you're in your studio maybe you can have
a few friends around to invite and try
it out
so the first time we did ever perform
this were absolutely no clue of what
would happen because we never tried it
so the first time was really like not a
soft launch there was a hard launch -
okay let's see it and it was quite
curious for us as we were discovering
what was happening as it goes so I would
say that's our our own first that's a
discovery or a magical moment but I
think the the thing that happened most
that is known as a surprising but the
paradox of it is that the people enjoy
it when they let themself go
so the and they all say that there
there's a kind of some strange trends
like moment that happens at one point so
I'm not sure if I can see it in the face
of the person doing it because we bit
busy with their computers but I
but and there's also of course the scary
moment at the beginning because you have
no clue so this is always fun there's
always a lot of nervous laughs at the
beginning so we kind of like I'm kind of
a little grin on her face when this
happens but I don't know if yeah yeah
our piece is really no it's a lot about
control and be in control not only about
that but in major part and it was very
interesting to discover that at the end
like this no impression that people have
no enjoying being controlled this is not
something we expected at the beginning
because we thought that it would be sort
of a little bit awkward for to be in a
machine and being not only becoming the
machine but also like being totally
subjected to the machine and this is
really I think yourself it's an
interesting and it's a happy discovery
in a sense that no we this is something
we can continue to work on and develop
in the future work I I think we we
anticipated a similar experience to
Berlin when we when we first premiered
the hexer dome in Berlin there was it
was very much as I started out as a
social experience and it was interesting
one of the one of the the first
installations we showed we showed in
Berlin was was with Brian Eno and he
talked about he kind of hit the nail on
the head which was essentially that you
know people walk into a space it's it's
even for here this this the location at
Pier 70 is is not typically known for
for doing these kinds of works or
presenting these kinds of works and so
seeing the context is is one part of it
seeing then then walking in and seeing
screens from in every direction is
another part of it and the colors and
all these things and
and then talking about the idea of
surrendering and that moment where you
do hit that that kind of contemplative
state and I think there is a natural
tendency to kind of you know want to see
what's going on behind you but once you
let go this kind of feeling it is you
know I I think yesterday was cool it was
to see this Magic Hour I think it was
about three hours in where everybody was
just kind of lying down on the ground
and and and yeah I think these are the
moments that we live for and the with
with the hexa dome anyways so just as a
creator Laura sort of building for this
kind of a platform instead of sort of
creating the platform itself did you
consider that sort of moment these
different kinds of moments or arc of the
experience and what were you hoping to
get people through with your with your
work
was it and how long is your work is it
twenty minutes I think most yeah the
world's four minutes stun the beginning
of my production process I was thinking
about what immersive spaces have I
already been in like what physical
spaces and I immediately thought about
two places and that's being the club and
also the church and how these two spaces
are both they're both spiritual spaces
in the club being a spiritual space for
people who don't necessarily feel
connected to two spiritual spaces in the
traditional sense and the institutional
sense and how in both spaces you are
connected through through sound and by I
mean you're basically producing
emotional and behave behavioral
responses and so yeah I was kind of
thinking about those two spaces but also
it wasn't long before I started working
on that that I was visiting a lot of
Armenian monasteries and I was kind of
obsessed with the architecture of the
spaces and how
certain monasteries are designed in a
way to house certain kinds of sounds and
and a lot of these places are you know
they're already very much integrated
into the environment they're like carved
out of mountains and like boulders and
you're inside these cave like spaces and
there's like a creek running beside you
but then there's also a choir singing
and how their voices are kind of
bouncing off the walls and coming at you
from all different directions and yeah
and kind of how you're in dialog you
know you're I mean same with the club
you're in dialogue with everyone else
who's also hearing this music and
feeling these vibrations and everything
and I was kind of sensing the same thing
in the monasteries and the churches so
we I mean overnight when I saw the dome
structure I immediately thought about
the church and how I could kind of mimic
these experiences and that that I
already feel immersed in in in these
like human and real-life elements but
yet during the production process I was
very much like detail oriented and
you're in control and you configure you
know where exactly the sound is coming
from all the movement that you map out
and everything but then there was
definitely that moment where Martin
Gropius bow yeah when we when I finally
had it in the installation I was like
whoa it sounds really different in here
and how much the space echoed and reverb
to your own piece but you kind of have
to step back at that point and be like
it's done and even last night it sounded
a little different than then it didn't a
museum in Berlin but again at this point
it's like that's a part of the
experience and you have to be okay with
that
I I like the connection you made between
the club and the church or the gallery
or what have you and just in terms of
the congregation or the community and
the experience that people are sharing
so there's 12 exoskeletons instead of
one and there's this sort of space
that's made for hundreds of people
versus one and I think VR is not you
know not
and so I think that and it's becoming
more and more the way you can do multi
user experiences and and I wonder what
your thoughts are and why why that's
that's sort of important to to what
you're creating I mean we talk about
shared direct experience quite a bit and
I mean a lot of these technologies as
great as they are can be somewhat
isolating and also I think just really
before digging into the topic I am I the
first thing that came to mind with it
with immersion was more in terms of a
single experience through VR and these
kinds of things and there is the
potential to to bring people together
using these technologies and and really
that's a big part of what the hexa dome
is about and also the the next two
projects exhibitions that will follow
how can we bring people into a space to
share in the experience together to have
a dialogue or or just really I just have
a sense of connection you know a and and
that is a great way to put it you know
these these other contemplatively a ting
these kinds of environments or new kinds
of environments is you know it's a it's
a pretty pretty worthwhile goal to have
I think in contrast to what it is that
we're typically being prescribed I think
just it you know into step to step in
just just to put a highlight what your
work with gray area is so important why
it's so important to get on that cutting
edge between technology and immersive
arts so the first element is it's
important to create open spaces open
spaces where one can experience other
kinds other options are the kinds of
words and that's only art and science
who can do that they are protected
against the political discourse and the
way of thinking we experienced in in a
day to day
and the second element is we live in a
moment where we can experience that our
way of thinking humanity and dealing
with nature dealing with other people as
objects does not solve any problem and
there are two important sources and one
source is what what do you call
spirituality so feeling being part of
something which is beyond beyond our
day-to-day life and the other source is
technology and and what do you succeed
here with the grey area festival is to
bring those two sources together to say
okay this technology which can give
access and there is a kind of
spirituality and we will experience that
from technology we will experience that
from the challenges coming from Africa
from the african philosophers which are
very much more oriented where the
vitality of life and not to deal with
objects and that will change profoundly
our way of thinking about arts so get
the object out of the retreat and into
the life and and that's the reason why
we are so thrilled to work together with
the IOM to get to work together with the
little cinema in in Brooklyn to do to
support such immersive experiences
because we think that will in a couple
of months and years that will support
change our way of thinking dealing with
each object and with everybody as an
object it's not that it's an object we
have to get into a discourse where the
other Ness is part of our self and will
change our behavior in a capitalistic
world basically